general/README.md, before:

# General concepts

## [PHP tags](php-tags.md)

+ The first line of all `.php` files should be exactly "`<?php`"
+ Never use the closing PHP tag (`?>`)
+ Never use PHP short tags

## [Standards](standards.md)

+ All files must only use `UTF-8`, without `BOM`
+ Always use UTC timezone to store date and time

## [Side effects](side-effects.md)

+ Every `.php` library file should contain one class exactly
+ Every `.php` library file should be side effect free

## [Naming convention](naming-convention.md)

+ Singular words (e.g. item, stylesheet, user) should be used throughout files and code instead of plurals
+ Avoid Hungarian Notation, where file/variable names that indicate their type

## [Functions](functions.md)

+ Limit function length
+ Ensure return points are consistent
+ A function should only ever do one thing, as indicated by its name

## [Variables](variables.md)

+ Use camelCase for variable naming
+ Never use global variables
+ Properties should always be declared
+ Variables should always be declared at the top of the block they are used in

## [Open closed principle](open-closed-principle.md)

+ Avoid using `final` keyword unless necessary
+ Avoid calling functions in global namespace

Commit message:

document query-command separation, closes #18

general/README.md, after:

# General concepts

## [PHP tags](php-tags.md)

+ The first line of all `.php` files should be exactly "`<?php`"
+ Never use the closing PHP tag (`?>`)
+ Never use PHP short tags

## [Standards](standards.md)

+ All files must only use `UTF-8`, without `BOM`
+ Always use UTC timezone to store date and time

## [Side effects](side-effects.md)

+ Every `.php` library file should contain one class exactly
+ Every `.php` library file should be side effect free

## [Naming convention](naming-convention.md)

+ Singular words (e.g. item, stylesheet, user) should be used throughout files and code instead of plurals
+ Avoid Hungarian Notation, where file/variable names that indicate their type

## [Functions](functions.md)

+ Limit function length
+ Ensure return points are consistent
+ A function should only ever do one thing, as indicated by its name
+ Functions should either mutate or query the system, never both

## [Variables](variables.md)

+ Use camelCase for variable naming
+ Never use global variables
+ Properties should always be declared
+ Variables should always be declared at the top of the block they are used in

## [Open closed principle](open-closed-principle.md)

+ Avoid using `final` keyword unless necessary
+ Avoid calling functions in global namespace
